---
title: "Book Review: A Childrens Bible: A Novel"
date: 2021-01-05T17:41:03-05:00
tags: 
  - book-review
  - lydia-millet
  - a-childrens-bible
summary: It's about the weather, not whether any deity exists. A story that examines generational adaptation to climate change. I use it as an excuse to examine what motivates me to push science and engineering forward.
twitterprompt: "Check out a review of \"A Children's Bible: A Novel\" by @lydia_millet, a story that examines generational adaptation to climate change and asks what responsibilities you have in this mess."
draft: false
---

After an extraordinarily hectic summer and fall of NASA work, MIT classes, and research projects, I desperately needed to mentally cool down and take a break. I was wildly oversubscribed. I took [another class in the MIT Advanced Study Program](/posts/20191229-a-semester-of-ai-at-mit/) in the fall, a graduate-level joint math and computer science class called "Parallel Computing and Scientific Machine Learning" (I'll probably write a review of the class later). I submitted my first AI journal article as a coauthor with the [MERS](https://www.csail.mit.edu/research/model-based-embedded-and-robotics-systems-group) lab. I submitted an application to grad school and a proposal for federal grant money. I started a new project in my full-time job at NASA for real-time spacewalk monitoring with the author of [Apollo in Real-Time](https://apolloinrealtime.org). And all of this was on top of my usual workload of existing responsibilities, like building a new cloud platform for sharing imagery analysis between NASA centers.

I don't think I took a day off for almost three months, starting around the beginning of October. The first two weeks of December were a flurry of final deadlines, culminating in the final project for the class I was taking. When the clock struck midnight on the 18th and my checklist hit zero, I collapsed on the couch and didn't get up until after the new year - mentally, that is. My brain was fried. I spent most of Christmas and New Years catching up on my video game backlog and doing easy web development at work. It was a good way to mentally downshift back to normal after months of excess caffeine and not enough sleep.

I dusted off my Kindle when I reached equilibrium again. I perused the NY Times bestseller lists and went through my routine of grabbing samples of all the books that sounded interesting. I read a few pages of each until I found one that held my attention. This time, it was Lydia Millet's _A Children's Bible: A Novel_. The writing style was what I was looking for. I wanted an easy read that was filled with color without feeling like a cartoon[^1].

**SPOILERS AHEAD**

Despite the title, _A Children's Bible_ is not a strictly religious novel, though it does proselytize in other ways. It follows a group of teens and children who are subjected to harrowing trials, not unlike any number of biblical and mythological figures. Their relationship with their parents, most of whom are unnamed, takes center stage. The story begins in an Eden, a secluded New England lake house where the kids run wild and the parents drink themselves lame. It is a summer holiday trip for families of moderate wealth. We follow Evie, a high school girl. She is there with her younger brother Jack, an empathetic boy who thinks himself the protector of the forest. Early in the story, he receives a Children's Bible as a gift, which he proceeds to try to "figure out." Evie herself is independent. To her, the parents haven't earned respect, they don't know how to do anything but drink and sleep around. We never get the parents perspective.

The story evolves through five distinct phases, which I'm sure follows the five books of the Old Testament (I was definitely not the best student in Sunday school). Eden turns into exodus when a massive storm hits and the house floods. The kids run away to higher ground as the parents ignore the damage and carry on with their orgy, oblivious even to the fact that kids are sick, injured, and missing. Things only get worse as we learn the storm is part of a larger weather system that effectively represents the climate change tipping point between the holocene and anthropocene apocalypse. We learn in bits and pieces that weather patterns across the world are disrupted and civilization is breaking down. The societal skills the parents prided themselves on are no longer useful, only survival skills matter. Kids and parents eventually reunite, though the roles have been reversed. The parents fail to rise to the crisis they created, and the children are forced to shoulder the burden of survival in Armageddon.

There is no veil that this story is a metaphor for the failure of past generations to mitigate climate change, putting the onus on future generations to fix the problems they created. In that way, it acts as a call to arms. Climate change is here and modern society is simply not compatible with it. Whether we cope or collapse is up to us. And this isn't an abstraction where we can hide behind statistics that we employ to minimize our individual impact. Each of us can make a difference. This is a pressure I put on myself. I don't know if it's fair or not, but I feel the weight of the world on my shoulders.

The end of _A Children's Bible_ sees Jack dying and terrified of the idea that our story will continue after he's gone and he won't know what happens. I share the same fear. So I try to cope in my own way, which is to not leave anything on the table. It reminds me of the last lecture I gave when I was a high school teacher.

[^1]: One time I heard the phrase "don't yuck someone else's yum." It resonated with me. I don't like using my opinions to put down something other people probably like. But this is my blog so I'll indulge this once. I used "cartoon" here as a disparaging remark. To me, a cartoon is a novel where the author uses adverbs and adjectives to exaggerate every mundane detail about the world for no apparent reason. It is the crutch of the lazy filmmaker masquerading as an author. If I wanted to see someone else's vivid idea of an imagined landscape, I would put on a movie or play a AAA game on my kitted out gaming PC. I read books to use my imagination. I prefer stories where the author defaults to sharing ideas and saves the bombastic writing for pivotal passages that deserve it. This is a real problem for me because so many scifi and fantasy books are cartoons. For every scifi book I finish, I probably started and quit four or five others.



